# Assignments from Nonlinear Optimization

## Translated by [LINDAT](https://lindat.mff.cuni.cz/services/translation/)

### Assignment 1

Write a program (preferably in C or C++) to solve systems of linear algebraic
equations. Load the right-side matrix and vector from a file. Prepare the
program so that you can change the solution method and how you store the
matrix. In the first phase, use the greatest drop method and save the matrix
as full, that is, in a two-dimensional field. Optimize the algorithm (try to
use different intermediate results and save the number of arithmetic
operations performed).

### Assignment 2

Expand the program from task 1 to use the pooled gradient method to solve
systems of linear algebraic equations. In the first phase, use the matrix
stored as full, that is to say in a two-dimensional array. Optimize the
algorithm (try to use different intermediate results and save the number of
arithmetic operations performed).

### Assignment 3

Implement the compressed-line matrix storage in the program developed in
Tasks 1 and 2. Verify that both methods (the greatest gradient method and the
combined gradient method) work. Compare computational times and used memory
for several systems (matrices and right-side vectors will be available).

## Czech Original

### Úkol č. 1

Napište program (nejlépe v jazyku C nebo C++), který bude řešit soustavy
lineárních algebraických rovnic. Matici a vektor pravé strany načtěte ze
souboru. Program připravte tak, aby bylo možné měnit metodu řešení a způsob
ukládání matice. V první fázi použijte metodu největšího spádu a matici uložte
jako plnou, to znamená do dvourozměrného pole. Algoritmus optimalizujte (snažte
se využít různé mezivýsledky a ušetřit počet prováděných aritmetických
operací).

### Úkol č. 2

Rozšiřte program z úkolu č. 1 tak, aby bylo možné použít pro řešení soustav
lineárních algebraických rovnic metodu sdružených gradientů. V první fázi
použijte matici uloženou jako plnou, to znamená do dvourozměrného pole.
Algoritmus optimalizujte (snažte se využít různé mezivýsledky a ušetřit počet
prováděných aritmetických operací).

### Úkol č. 3

Do programu vyvinutého v úkolech č. 1 a 2 implementujte ukládání matic typu
kompresované řádky. Ověřte, že obě metody (metoda největšího spádu i metoda
sdružených gradientů) fungují. Proveďte porovnání výpočetních časů a použité
paměti pro několik soustav (matice a vektory pravých stran budou k dispozici).

